Redis - Redis is fundamentally a key-value store where keys are always strings, but values can be various data structures like strings, hashes, lists, sets, sorted sets, and more.
Some of the most fundamental data structures supported by Redis:
Strings
Hashes (objects/dictionaries)
Lists
Sets
Sorted Sets (Priority Queues)
Bloom Filters (probabilistic set membership; allows false positives)
Geospatial Indexes
Time Series
In addition to simple data structures, Redis also supports different communication patterns like Pub/Sub and Streams, 
partially standing in for more complex setups like Apache Kafka or AWS SNS (Simple Notification Service) / SQS (Simple Queue Service).
In a cluster, Redis clients cache hash slot mappings to directly connect to the node containing their requested data, prioritizing performance by avoiding redirects and coordinator overhead.


Redis' Sets support simple operations like adding an element to the set (SADD), getting the number of elements or cardinality (SCARD, the count of set members), 
listing those elements (SMEMBERS) and checking existence (SISMEMBER) 
Redis is really, really fast. Redis can handle O(100k) writes per second and read latency is often in the microsecond range

Redis as distributed lock - A very simple distributed lock with a timeout might use the atomic increment (INCR) with a TTL. This is basically a shared counter. When we want to try to acquire the lock, we run INCR. 
If the response is 1 (i.e. we were the first person to try to grab the lock, so we own it!), we proceed. 
If the response is > 1 (i.e. someone else beat us and has the lock), we wait and retry again later. When we're done with the lock, we can DEL the key so that other processes can make use of it.

Redis for leaderboards - we have a need to find the posts which contain a given keyword (e.g. "tiger") which have the most likes (e.g. "Tiger Woods made an appearance..." @ 500 likes).
We can use Redis' sorted sets to maintain a list of the top liked posts for a given keyword. Periodically, we can remove low-ranked posts to save space.

Redis for rate limiting - fixed-window rate limiter - When a request comes in, we increment (INCR) the key for our rate limiter and check the response. 
If the response is greater than N, we wait. If it's less than N, we can proceed. We call EXPIRE on our key so that after time period W, the value is reset.
If you need a sliding window, you can store timestamps in a Sorted Set per key and remove old entries before counting

Redis for gepspatial search- Redis natively supports geospatial indexes with commands like GEOADD and GEOSEARCH

Redis for events sourcing - Redis' streams are append-only logs similar to Kafka's topics.Redis' streams are append-only logs similar to Kafka's topics. The basic idea behind Redis streams is that we want to durably 
add items to a log and then have a distributed mechanism for consuming items from these logs.
With Redis streams we add items onto the queue with commands like XADD and have a single consumer group attached to the stream for our workers. 
This consumer group is maintaining a reference to the items processed via the stream and, in the case a worker fails, provides a way for a new worker to claim (XCLAIM) and restart processing that message.

Redis for pub/sub - Redis natively supports a publish/subscribe (Pub/Sub) messaging pattern, allowing messages to be broadcast to multiple subscribers in real time. 
This is useful for building chat systems, real-time notifications, or any scenario where you want to decouple message producers from consumers.
SPUBLISH channel message   # Sends a message to all subscribers of 'channel' (the S prefix means "sharded")
SSUBSCRIBE channel        # Listens for messages on 'channel'
When a client subscribes to a channel, it will receive any messages published to that channel as long as the connection remains open. This makes Pub/Sub great for ephemeral, 
real-time communication, but it's important to note that messages are not persisted—if a subscriber is offline when a message is published, it will miss that message entirely.
