gRPC is worth mentioning for internal service-to-service communication when performance is critical. 
It uses binary serialization and HTTP/2, making it significantly faster than JSON over HTTP. 
But you won't use it for public-facing APIs 
because browsers don't natively support gRPC (gRPC-Web exists as a workaround, 
but it requires a proxy and doesn't support all gRPC features). 


Load balancing is another area interviewers love to probe. Layer 7 load balancers operate at the application level and 
can route based on the actual HTTP request content. You can send API calls to one service and web page requests to another. 
Layer 4 load balancers work at the TCP level and are faster but dumber. 
They just distribute connections without looking at the content. Layer 4 load balancers operate at the transport layer (TCP/UDP). 
They make routing decisions based on network information like IP addresses and ports, without looking at the actual content of the packets.ex - amazon network load balancer(NLB)
Layer 4 load balancers have some key characteristics, they ...
    Maintain persistent TCP connections between client and server.
    Are fast and efficient due to minimal packet inspection.
    Cannot make routing decisions based on application data.
    Are typically used when raw performance is the priority.
For example, if a client establishes a TCP connection through an L4 load balancer, that same server will handle 
all subsequent requests within that TCP session. This makes L4 load balancers particularly well-suited for protocols that require persistent connections, like WebSocket connections.
For WebSockets, you typically need Layer 4 balancing because you're maintaining a persistent TCP connection.
The most common load balancers are AWS Elastic Load Balancer (a hosted offering from AWS), NGINX (an open-source webserver frequently used as a load balancer), 
and HAProxy (a popular open-source load balancer). 

Layer 7 load balancers operate at the application layer, understanding protocols like HTTP. 
They can examine the actual content of each request and make more intelligent routing decisions.
Layer 7 load balancers have some key characteristics, they ...
    Terminate incoming connections and create new ones to backend servers.
    Can route based on request content (URL, headers, cookies, etc.).
    More CPU-intensive due to packet inspection.
    Provide more flexibility and features.
    Better suited for HTTP-based traffic.

If a server loses power or crashes, the load balancer stops routing traffic to it until it recovers.
To do this, load balancers use health checks. Health checks are a way for the load balancer to determine if a server is healthy. 
They can be configured to check the server at different intervals and with different protocols.

Load Balancing Algorithms
The other benefit of a dedicated load balancer is that we have more choices over the algorithm used to distribute traffic.
    Round Robin: Requests are distributed sequentially across servers
    Random: Requests are distributed randomly across servers
    Least Connections: Requests go to the server with the fewest active connections
    Least Response Time: Requests go to the server with the fastest response time
    IP Hash: Client IP determines which server receives the request (useful for session persistence)

Enterprise hardware load balancers can scale to support 100's of millions of requests per second, whereas software load balancers are more limited.

For geospatial queries in Postgres, PostGIS is a popular extension.
PostgreSQL with PostGIS extensions or Redis' geospatial data type, or dedicated solutions like Elasticsearch with geo-queries enabled.

If Redis goes down, every request suddenly hits your database. 
Can it handle that traffic spike? This is called a cache stampede and it can take down your whole system. Some approaches include keeping a small in-process cache
as a fallback, using circuit breakers to prevent overwhelming the database, or accepting degraded performance until Redis comes back up.

Latency num ers
Memory access takes nanoseconds. SSD reads take microseconds. Network calls within a data center take 1-10 milliseconds. 
Cross-continent calls take tens to hundreds of milliseconds.

We're expecting 50K requests per second, each server can handle maybe 5K requests, so we need around 10 servers plus some headroom.

Component	Key Metrics	Scale Triggers
Caching	
    - ~1 millisecond latency
    - 100k+ operations/second
    - Memory-bound (up to 1TB)	
  Trigers to scalr
    - Hit rate < 80%
    - Latency > 1ms
    - Memory usage > 80%
    - Cache churn/thrashing
Databases	
    - Up to 50k transactions/second
    - Sub-5ms read latency (cached)
    - 64 TiB+ storage capacity	
  Triggers to scale- Write throughput > 10k TPS
    - Read latency > 5ms uncached
    - Geographic distribution needs
App Servers	
    - 100k+ concurrent connections
    - 8-64 cores @ 2-4 GHz
    - 64-512GB RAM standard, up to 2TB	
  scale triggers
    - CPU > 70% utilization
    - Response latency > SLA
    - Connections near 100k/instance
    - Memory > 80%
Message Queues	
    - Up to 1 million msgs/sec per broker
    - Sub-5ms end-to-end latency
    - Up to 50TB storage	
  scale troggers
    - Throughput near 800k msgs/sec
    - Partition count ~200k per cluster
    - Growing consumer lag



The most common API gateways are AWS API Gateway, Kong, and Apigee. 

Some of the most popular CDNs are Cloudflare, Akamai, and Amazon CloudFront. 

optimize read performance within your database through indexing and denormalization, scale horizontally with read replicas, then add external caching layers like Redis and CDNs.

The Scaling Writes pattern addresses write bottlenecks through sharding, batching, and intelligent load management.


Network Essentials
Network Layer (Layer 3)
At this layer is IP, the protocol that handles routing and addressing. It's responsible for breaking the data into packets, 
handling packet forwarding between networks, and providing best-effort delivery to any destination IP address on the network.

Transport Layer (Layer 4)
At this layer, we have TCP, QUIC, and UDP, which provide end-to-end communication services. 
Think of them like a layer that provides features like reliability, ordering, and flow control on top of the network layer.
UDP - 
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is the machinegun of protocols. It offers few features on top of IP but is very fast. 
Spray and pray is the right way to think about this. It provides a simpler, connectionless service with no guarantees of delivery, ordering, or duplicate protection.
Key characteristics of UDP include:
    Connectionless: No handshake or connection setup
    No guarantee of delivery: Packets may be lost without notification
    No ordering: Packets may arrive in a different order than sent
    Lower latency: Less overhead means faster transmission
UDP is perfect for applications where speed is more important than reliability, such as live video streaming, online gaming, VoIP, and DNS lookups
For VOIP as an example, the client might just drop the occasional packet leading to a hiccup in the audio but overall the conversation is still intelligible. 
This is vastly preferable to retransmitting those lost packets and clogging up the network with ACKs.

TCP - 
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is the workhorse of the internet. It provides reliable, ordered, and error-checked delivery of data. 
It establishes a connection through a three-way handshake and maintains that connection throughout the communication session.
is a stateful connection between the client and server — it also gives us a basis to talk about ordering: two messages sent in the same stream/connection will arrive in the same order. 
TCP will ensure that recipients of messages acknowledge their receipt and, if they don't, will retransmit the message until it is acknowledged.
Key Characteristics of TCP
    Connection-oriented: Establishes a dedicated connection before data transfer
    Reliable delivery: Guarantees that data arrives in order and without errors
    Flow control: Prevents overwhelming receivers with too much data
    Congestion control: Adapts to network congestion to prevent collapse

a web-based video conferencing app might use TCP/HTTP for signaling and authentication but UDP/WebRTC for the actual audio/video streams.


Application Layer (Layer 7)
At the final layer are the application protocols like DNS, HTTP, Websockets, WebRTC. These are common protocols that build on top of TCP (or UDP, in the case of WebRTC)
http/https - 
It's a request-response protocol where clients send requests to servers, and servers respond with the requested data.
HTTP is a stateless protocol, meaning that each request is independent and the server doesn't need to maintain any information about previous requests. 
    GET: Request data from the server. GET requests should be idempotent and don't have a body.idempotent
    POST: Send data to the server. not idempotent
    PUT: Update data on the server. PUT replaces an entire resource with what you send, or creates it if it doesn't exist. If you're updating a user's profile completely, 
PUT to /users/{id} with the full user object. Unlike POST, PUT is idempotent, so sending the same data multiple times results in the same final state.
    PATCH: Update a resource partially. Unlike PUT, PATCH is not guaranteed to be idempotent - the result depends on how you implement it. 
A PATCH that says "set email to X" is idempotent, but a PATCH that says "append to list" is not.
    DELETE: Delete data from the server. DELETE requests are idempotent. first call might return 204, subsequent calls might return 404)
GET, PUT, and DELETE are idempotent because calling them multiple times doesn't change the final result. POST and PATCH are not guaranteed to be idempotent, 
which matters when networks fail and clients retry requests. You don't want duplicate bookings from a retry.

GraphQL solves these problems by allowing the frontend team to flexibly query the backend for exactly the data they need. The backend 
can then respond with the data in the shape that the frontend needs it. This is a great fit for mobile apps and other use-cases where you want to reduce the amount of data transferred.
But this flexibility creates the N+1 problem, the biggest GraphQL gotcha. When a client queries events with their venues, you might execute one query for events, then N separate queries for each venue. 
With 100 events, that's 101 database queries instead of 2. The solution is batching/dataloader patterns that group related queries together, but it adds complexity you don't have with REST.
GraphQL also handles authorization differently. Instead of securing entire endpoints like REST, you secure individual fields. 
A user might see an event's name and date but not the venue data. You can control this at the field level in your schema resolvers.

gRPC is a high-performance RPC (Remote Procedure Call) framework from Google (the "g") that uses HTTP/2 and Protocol Buffers.
most important thing to know is that it's a binary protocol that's faster and more efficient than JSON over HTTP
examples =
// Instead of GET /events/123
getEvent(eventId: "123")

// Instead of POST /events/123/bookings
createBooking(eventId: "123", userId: "456", tickets: [...])

// Instead of GET /events/123/tickets
getAvailableTickets(eventId: "123", section: "VIP")
The most popular RPC protocol today is gRPC, which uses Protocol Buffers for serialization and HTTP/2 for transport. 
Another notable RPC framework is Apache Thrift, originally developed at Facebook and now open source, which supports multiple programming languages and serialization formats.\
gRPC uses Protocol Buffers (protobuf) to define service contracts. You write a .proto file that describes your service methods and data structures:
service TicketService {
  rpc GetEvent(GetEventRequest) returns (Event);
  rpc CreateBooking(CreateBookingRequest) returns (Booking);
  rpc GetAvailableTickets(GetTicketsRequest) returns (TicketList);
}

message GetEventRequest {
  string event_id = 1;
}

message Event {
  string id = 1;
  string name = 2;
  int64 date = 3;
  Venue venue = 4;
}
From this single definition, gRPC generates client and server code in multiple programming languages. 
This means your Go backend service and your Java payment service can communicate with compile-time type safety, catching mismatches before deployment.

Server-Sent Events (SSE):many applications need to "push" data to clients in a more streaming fashion. While gRPC does support streaming, 
it's not ideal for external APIs due to limited support (e.g. no browsers support gRPC today). 
Server-Sent Events (SSE) is a spec defined on top of HTTP that allows a server to push many messages to the client over a single HTTP connection.
with SSE, the server can push many messages as "chunks" in a single response from the server:
data: {"id": 1, "timestamp": "2025-01-01T00:00:00Z", "description": "Event 1"}
data: {"id": 2, "timestamp": "2025-01-01T00:00:01Z", "description": "Event 2"}
...
data: {"id": 100, "timestamp": "2025-01-01T00:00:10Z", "description": "Event 100"}
Each line here is received as a separate message from the server. The client can then process each message as it comes in. It's still one big HTTP response (same TCP connection), 
but it comes in over many smaller packets and clients are expected to process each line of the body individually to allow them to react to the data as it comes in.
Now with all good hacks, SSE comes with some acute limitations. We can't keep an SSE connection open for too long because the server (or the load balancer, 
or a middle box proxy) will close down the connection. So the SSE standard defines the behavior of an EventSource object that, once the connection is closed, will automatically 
reconnect with the ID of the last message received. Servers are expected to keep track of prior messages that may have been missed while the client was disconnected and resend them.
SSE useful in system design interviews in situations where you want clients to get notifications or events as soon as they happen

web sockets  
Unlike HTTP's request-response model, WebSockets enable servers to push data to clients 
without being prompted by a new request. Similarly clients can push data back to the server without the same wait.
WebSockets are initiated via an HTTP "upgrade" protocol, which allows an existing TCP connection to change L7 protocols. This is super convenient because it means 
you can utilize some of the existing HTTP session information (e.g. cookies, headers, etc.) to your advantage.
Here's how it works:
    Client initiates WebSocket handshake over HTTP (with a backing TCP connection)
    Connection upgrades to WebSocket protocol, WebSocket takes over the TCP connection
    Both client and server can send binary messages to each other over the connection
    The connection stays open until explicitly closed
WebSockets don't dictate an application protocol, you effectively have a channel where you can send binary packets to the server from the client and vice versa. 
This means you'll need some way of defining what it is your client and server are exchanging. 
For many WebSocket applications, simple serialized JSON messages are a great option! This also gives you a chance to define the API of your service for your design:
wss:// /tickers
Received:
{
  msgType: "tickerUpdate"
  ticker: "xyz"
  valueInCents: 1030
}
Sent:
{
  action: "subscribe"
  ticker: "xyz"
}
{
  action: "unsubscribe"
  ticker: "xyz"
}
WebSockets are powerful, but the infra required to support them can be expensive and the overhead of stateful connections (especially at scale) 

WEbRTC - 
WebRTC enables direct peer-to-peer communication between browsers without requiring an intermediary server for the data exchange.
WebRTC can be perfect for collaborative applications like document editors and is especially useful for video/audio calling and conferencing applications.
based on UDC
With WebRTC, clients talk to a central "signaling server" which keeps track of which peers are available together with their connection information. 
Once a client has the connection information for another peer, they can try to establish a direct connection without going through any intermediary servers.
In practice, most clients don't allow inbound connections for security reasons and the majority of users are behind a NAT (network address translation) 
device which keeps them from being connected to directly. So if we stopped there, most peers wouldn't be able to "speak" to each other.
The WebRTC standard includes two methods to work around these restrictions:
    STUN: "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT" is a protocol and a set of techniques like "hole punching" which allows peers to establish publically routable addresses and ports.
    TURN: "Traversal Using Relays around NAT" is effectively a relay service, a way to bounce requests through a central server which can then be routed to the appropriate peer.
There's effectively 4 steps to a WebRTC connection:
    Clients connect to a central signaling server to learn about their peers.
    Clients reach out to a STUN server to get their public IP address and port.
    Clients share this information with each other via the signaling server.
    Clients establish a direct peer-to-peer connection and start sending data.


what happens when we get a web request - 
First, we use DNS to convert a human-readable domain name like hellointerview.com into an IP address like 32.42.52.62
DNS Resolution: The client starts by resolving the domain name of the website to an IP address using DNS (Domain Name System).
TCP Handshake: The client initiates a TCP connection with the server using a three-way handshake:
SYN: The client sends a SYN (synchronize) packet to the server to request a connection.
SYN-ACK: The server responds with a SYN-ACK (synchronize-acknowledge) packet to acknowledge the request.
ACK: The client sends an ACK (acknowledge) packet to establish the connection.
HTTP Request: Once the TCP connection is established, the client sends an HTTP GET request to the server to request the web page.
Server Processing: The server processes the request, retrieves the requested web page, and prepares an HTTP response. (This is usually the only latency most SWE's think about and control!)
HTTP Response: The server sends the HTTP response back to the client, which includes the requested web page content.
TCP Teardown: After the data transfer is complete, the client and server close the TCP connection using a four-way handshake:
FIN: The client sends a FIN (finish) packet to the server to terminate the connection.
ACK: The server acknowledges the FIN packet with an ACK.
FIN: The server sends a FIN packet to the client to terminate its side of the connection.
ACK: The client acknowledges the server's FIN packet with an ACK.

Reliability - 
Circuit breakers can be a great response when an interviewer is deep-diving on reliability, failure modes, or disaster recovery.
Circuit breakers provide numerous advantages:
    Fail Fast: Quickly reject requests to failing services instead of waiting for timeouts
    Reduce Load: Prevent overwhelming already struggling services with more requests
    Self-Healing: Automatically test recovery without full traffic load
    Improved User Experience: Provide fast fallbacks instead of hanging UI
    System Stability: Prevent failures in one service from affecting the entire system


Authorization
API keys - API keys are long, randomly generated strings that act like passwords for applications rather than humans. 
When a client makes a request, they include their API key in the Authorization header, and your server looks up that key to identify which application is making the request.
you generate a unique API key for each client (like sk_live_abc123def456...), store it in your database along with any permissions or rate limits for that client, and 
then verify each incoming request by looking up the key. They're perfect for server-to-server communication where you control both sides
GET /events
Authorization: Bearer sk_live_abc123...

JWT (JSON Web Tokens)
JWT tokens, on the other hand, encode user information directly into the token itself rather than storing session state on your server. 
When a user logs in successfully, your server creates a JWT containing their user ID, permissions, and an expiration time, then signs the entire token with a secret key.
Conveniently, when that JWT comes back with future requests, you can verify it's authentic by checking the signature, 
and you can read the user information directly from the token without any database lookups. The token itself carries all the context you need to authorize the request.
// JWT payload
{
  "user_id": "123",
  "email": "john@example.com",
  "role": "customer",
  "exp": 1640995200
}
Use API keys for internal service communication and external developer access. Use JWT tokens for user sessions in web and mobile applications. 
JWT tokens can be stateless (no database lookup required) and can carry user context, making them ideal for user-facing applications.

Authorization - 
Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)
Real systems have different types of users with different permissions. In our Ticketmaster system, customers can book tickets and view their bookings, venue managers can create events and view sales reports, and system admins can access everything.
RBAC assigns roles to users and permissions to roles:
Roles:
- customer: can book tickets, view own bookings
- venue_manager: can create events, view sales for their venues
- admin: can access everything

User: john@example.com → Role: customer
User: manager@venue.com → Role: venue_manager

Rate limiting prevents abuse by restricting how many requests a client can make in a given time period. This protects your system from both malicious attacks and accidental overuse.
Common strategies include:
    Per-user limits: 1000 requests per hour per authenticated user
    Per-IP limits: 100 requests per hour for unauthenticated requests
    Endpoint-specific limits: 10 booking attempts per minute to prevent ticket scalping
You typically implement rate limiting at the API gateway level or using middleware in your application. 
When limits are exceeded, return a 429 Too Many Requests status code.


Datbases
nosql db
key values stores
document dbs

wide column family dbs
Wide-column databases organize data into column families where rows can have different sets of columns. They're optimized for massive write-heavy workloads and time-series data.
When a user creates a new post, you add a new row keyed by (user_id, timestamp). Rows with the same partition key (user_id) are stored together, 
making writes fast (just append to the partition) and reads efficient (scan a contiguous range of a user's posts).
Data modeling impact: You'll design around query patterns even more than with SQL, 
often duplicating data across different column families to support various access patterns. Time becomes a first-class citizen in your modeling.
Example technologies include Cassandra and HBase.

Graph db - 
optimizing for traversing relationships between entities.
The classic examples are social networks and recommendation engines, but even Facebook models their social graph with MySQL. 
If it's good enough for the world's largest social network, it's probably good enough for your interview.
Example technologies include Neo4j and Amazon Neptune.


Caching - 
Postgres may take 50 milliseconds, but reading from an in-memory cache like Redis takes just 1 millisecond.
Databases store data on disk, and every query pays the cost of disk access. Memory sits much closer to the CPU and avoids that entirely.
CDN - 
Without a CDN, every image request travels to your origin. If your server is in Virginia and the user is in India, that adds 250–300 ms of latency per request. 
With a CDN, the same image is served from a nearby edge server in 20–40 ms. That is a massive performance difference.
types: 
write through - chache write, then it wrotes sync to db
write back (write behind) - cacje write , the it batches nd writes async to db

read thru - read from cache, if not in cache  - cache reads from db, and then return to user.
cache aside - read always from cache, if not in cache, read from db , also populate cache.

A cache stampede happens when a popular cache entry expires and many requests try to rebuild it at the same time. 
Instead of one query, you suddenly have hundreds or thousands hitting the database simultaneously, which can overload it and cause cascading failures.
solution - 
Request coalescing (also called single flight) lets only one request rebuild the entry when it expires while other concurrent requests wait for that result, 
preventing a flood of simultaneous database queries. Proactively refreshing the entry before it expires (cache warming) is another good approach.

shrading - 
Here's what makes a good shard key:
    High cardinality: The key should have many unique values. 
        Sharding by a boolean field (true/false) means you can only have two shards max, which defeats the purpose. 
        Sharding by user ID when you have millions of users gives you plenty of room to distribute data.
    Even distribution: Values should spread evenly across shards. If you shard by country and 90% of your users are in the US, that shard will be massively larger than the others. 
        User ID usually distributes well. Creation timestamps can work if new records don't all pile onto the most recent shard.
    Aligns with queries: Your most common queries should ideally hit just one shard. If you shard users by user_id, queries like "get user profile" or "get user's orders" 
        hit a single shard. Queries that span all shards become expensive.

bad shrad keys - 
bad ones could be:
🔴 is_premium (boolean): Only two possible values means only two shards. One shard gets all premium users, the other gets free users. If most users are free, that shard is overloaded.
🔴 created_at for a growing table: All new writes go to the most recent shard. That shard becomes a hot spot for writes while older shards handle almost no traffic.

Shrading - 
Most modern distributed databases handle sharding automatically.
Common NoSQL databases like Cassandra, DynamoDB, and MongoDB all let you specify a partition key and handle the rest, but they do not all use the same distribution mechanism:
    Cassandra uses a partitioner (e.g., Murmur3Partitioner) with virtual nodes, which is a form of consistent hashing to map partition keys to token ranges on nodes.
    DynamoDB hashes the partition key to route items to internal partitions and splits/merges partitions as they grow; this is not classic ring-based consistent hashing exposed to users.
    MongoDB shards data into range-based chunks on the shard key. If you choose a hashed shard key, the ranges are over the hash space. 
        A background balancer automatically splits and migrates chunks to keep shards balanced. It is not classic consistent hashing.

SQL databases have also matured and made sharding easier than it once was. Vitess and Citus are popular open-source sharding layers that sit in front of PostgreSQL or MySQL. 
They handle query routing, cross-shard operations, and resharding without you having to build it yourself. 
Cloud providers like AWS Aurora and Google Cloud Spanner offer distributed SQL with built-in sharding.

Consistent hashing doesn't solve this on its own since it distributes keys evenly, not traffic. Here are a few strategies that real systems use:
    Read replicas: Replicate popular keys across multiple nodes and load-balance reads among them. This is the most common approach.
    Key-space salting: Append a random suffix to hot keys (e.g., taylor-swift-{0..9}) so they hash to different nodes. Reads then scatter across those nodes and get aggregated.
    Adaptive rebalancing: Monitor traffic in real-time and move specific key ranges off overloaded nodes. This is operationally complex but some systems (like DynamoDB) do it automatically.

Real hash rings use large hash spaces (commonly 2^32 or 2^128) 
to minimize the chance of collisions and ensure even distribution. The 0-100 range you see in diagrams is just for educational illustrations.


Redis - Redis is fundamentally a key-value store where keys are always strings, but values can be various data structures like strings, hashes, lists, sets, sorted sets, and more.
Some of the most fundamental data structures supported by Redis:
Strings
Hashes (objects/dictionaries)
Lists
Sets
Sorted Sets (Priority Queues)
Bloom Filters (probabilistic set membership; allows false positives)
Geospatial Indexes
Time Series
In addition to simple data structures, Redis also supports different communication patterns like Pub/Sub and Streams, 
partially standing in for more complex setups like Apache Kafka or AWS SNS (Simple Notification Service) / SQS (Simple Queue Service).
In a cluster, Redis clients cache hash slot mappings to directly connect to the node containing their requested data, prioritizing performance by avoiding redirects and coordinator overhead.


Redis' Sets support simple operations like adding an element to the set (SADD), getting the number of elements or cardinality (SCARD, the count of set members), 
listing those elements (SMEMBERS) and checking existence (SISMEMBER) 
Redis is really, really fast. Redis can handle O(100k) writes per second and read latency is often in the microsecond range

Redis as distributed lock - A very simple distributed lock with a timeout might use the atomic increment (INCR) with a TTL. This is basically a shared counter. When we want to try to acquire the lock, we run INCR. 
If the response is 1 (i.e. we were the first person to try to grab the lock, so we own it!), we proceed. 
If the response is > 1 (i.e. someone else beat us and has the lock), we wait and retry again later. When we're done with the lock, we can DEL the key so that other processes can make use of it.

Redis for leaderboards - we have a need to find the posts which contain a given keyword (e.g. "tiger") which have the most likes (e.g. "Tiger Woods made an appearance..." @ 500 likes).
We can use Redis' sorted sets to maintain a list of the top liked posts for a given keyword. Periodically, we can remove low-ranked posts to save space.

Redis for rate limiting - fixed-window rate limiter - When a request comes in, we increment (INCR) the key for our rate limiter and check the response. 
If the response is greater than N, we wait. If it's less than N, we can proceed. We call EXPIRE on our key so that after time period W, the value is reset.
If you need a sliding window, you can store timestamps in a Sorted Set per key and remove old entries before counting

Redis for gepspatial search- Redis natively supports geospatial indexes with commands like GEOADD and GEOSEARCH

Redis for events sourcing - Redis' streams are append-only logs similar to Kafka's topics.Redis' streams are append-only logs similar to Kafka's topics. The basic idea behind Redis streams is that we want to durably 
add items to a log and then have a distributed mechanism for consuming items from these logs.
With Redis streams we add items onto the queue with commands like XADD and have a single consumer group attached to the stream for our workers. 
This consumer group is maintaining a reference to the items processed via the stream and, in the case a worker fails, provides a way for a new worker to claim (XCLAIM) and restart processing that message.

Redis for pub/sub - Redis natively supports a publish/subscribe (Pub/Sub) messaging pattern, allowing messages to be broadcast to multiple subscribers in real time. 
This is useful for building chat systems, real-time notifications, or any scenario where you want to decouple message producers from consumers.
SPUBLISH channel message   # Sends a message to all subscribers of 'channel' (the S prefix means "sharded")
SSUBSCRIBE channel        # Listens for messages on 'channel'
When a client subscribes to a channel, it will receive any messages published to that channel as long as the connection remains open. This makes Pub/Sub great for ephemeral, 
real-time communication, but it's important to note that messages are not persisted—if a subscriber is offline when a message is published, it will miss that message entirely.

Elastic Search - 
Under the hood, Elasticsearch uses a combination of geospatial indexing strategies — including geohashes, BKD trees (a variant of k-d trees optimized for block storage), and R-tree-like structures — 
to make these queries fast even across millions of documents. The geo_point type specifically uses a BKD tree to index coordinates, which allows Elasticsearch to efficiently 
narrow the search space in two dimensions without the limitations of a standard B-tree index on latitude and longitude separately.
BST or other similar implementations of BST like AVL trees, leverage the capability of dividing the search space by 2 at each node during the traversal, 
thus resulting in a O(logN) search in the best case scenario. It is possible to balance BSTs by rotating the tree with the pivot.
 It is easy for us to use BST to search for either the latitude or longitude but not both the elements together since BST is capable of handling only one dimension in its store.

BKD tree - BST (Binary Search Tree) which will be the base for our post. A BST is a binary tree which has lesser elements to its left and greater elements to its right for all nodes.
Elasticsearch's use of specialized data structures like skip lists and finite state transducers for its inverted index shows how tailored data structures can dramatically improve performance
Master nodes handle cluster administration like adding/removing nodes and creating indices. Data nodes store documents and their indexes. 
Coordinating nodes receive search requests and distribute them across the cluster. Ingest nodes transform data before indexing.

Kafka - 
We can group consumers together into what Kafka calls a consumer group. With consumer groups, 
each partition is assigned to exactly one consumer in the group, so under normal operation each event is delivered to a single consumer. 

A Kafka cluster is made up of multiple brokers. These are just individual servers (they can be physical or virtual). Each broker is responsible for storing data and serving clients. 
The more brokers you have, the more data you can store and the more clients you can serve.
Each broker has a number of partitions. Each partition is an ordered, immutable sequence of messages that is continually appended to -- 
think of like a log file. Partitions are the way Kafka scales as they allow for messages to be consumed in parallel.
A topic is just a logical grouping of partitions. Topics are the way you publish and subscribe to data in Kafka. When you publish a message, you publish it to a topic, and when you consume a message, you consume it from a topic. 
Topics are always multi-producer; that is, a topic can have zero, one, or many producers that write data to it.

you can use Kafka as either a message queue or a stream. Frankly, the distinction here is minor. In both modes, consumers track their progress using offset commits. 
The key difference is in the consumption pattern: when used as a message queue, each message is processed by one consumer in a group and then effectively "consumed." 
When used as a stream, the log is retained and can be replayed, multiple consumer groups can independently read the same data, and consumers can process data continuously as it arrives.

When an event occurs, the producer formats a message, also referred to as a record, and sends it to a Kafka topic. A message consists of four fields, all technically optional: a value (the payload), a key, a timestamp, and headers. 
The key is used to determine which partition the message is sent to. The timestamp records when the message was created or ingested (but ordering within a partition is determined by offsets, 
not timestamps). Headers, like HTTP headers, are key-value pairs that can be used to store metadata about the message.

It's a common anti-pattern in system design interviews to store large blobs of data in Kafka. Kafka is not a database, and it's not meant to store large files. 
It's meant to store small messages that can be processed quickly.
On good hardware, a single broker can store around 1TB of data and handle as many as 1M messages per second 
(this is very hand wavy as it depends on message size and hardware specs, but is a useful estimate).

What is far more relevant and likely is that a consumer goes down. When a consumer fails, Kafka's fault tolerance mechanisms help ensure continuity:
Offset Management: Remember that partitions are just append-only logs where each message is assigned a unique offset. 
Consumers commit their offsets to Kafka after they process a message. This is the consumers way of saying, "I've processed this message." When a consumer restarts, it reads its last committed offset from Kafka and resumes processing from there. This ensures no messages are missed, though some may be reprocessed if the consumer crashed before committing its latest offset (at-least-once delivery).
Rebalancing: When part of a consumer group, if one consumer goes down, Kafka will redistribute the partitions among the remaining consumers so that all partitions are still being processed.

Kafka does not actually support retries for consumers out of the box (but AWS SQS does!) so we need to implement our own retry logic. One common pattern is to set up a custom topic that 
we can move failed messages to and then have a separate consumer that processes these messages. This way, we can retry messages as many times as we want without affecting the main consumer. 
If a given message is retried too many times, we can move it to a dead letter queue (DLQ). DLQs are just a place to store failed messages so that we can investigate them later.

Performance optimizations - 
Kafka producers naturally batch messages before sending them over the network to reduce overhead. You can also use sendBatch() to send messages across multiple topics in one call.
Another common way to improve throughput is by compressing messages. This can be done by setting the compression option when sending messages. Kafka supports several compression 
algorithms, including GZIP, Snappy, and LZ4.
Arguably the biggest impact you can have to performance comes back to your choice of partition key. The goal is to maximize parallelism by ensuring that messages are evenly distributed across partitions.

API gateway scaling - 
The most straightforward approach to handling increased load is horizontal scaling. API Gateways are typically stateless, 
making them ideal candidates for horizontal scaling. You can add more gateway instances behind a load balancer to distribute incoming requests.

Cloud providers offer fully managed API Gateway solutions that integrate well with their ecosystems.
AWS API Gateway
    Seamless integration with AWS services
    Supports REST and WebSocket APIs
    Built-in features like:
    Request throttling
    API keys and usage plans
    AWS Lambda integration
    CloudWatch monitoring
Azure API Management
    Strong OAuth and OpenID Connect support
    Policy-based configuration
    Developer portal for API documentation
Google Cloud Endpoints
    Deep integration with GCP services
    Strong gRPC support
    Automatic OpenAPI documentation

Cassandra - 
One notable consistency level to understand is QUORUM. QUORUM requires a majority (n/2 + 1) of replicas to respond. 
Applying QUORUM to both reads and writes guarantees that writes are visible to reads because at least one overlapping node is guaranteed to participate 
in both a write and a read. To illustrate this, let's assume a set of 3 nodes. 3/2 + 1 = 2, so 2 of 3 nodes need to be written to and read from in order 
for writes and reads to succeed. This means that a write will always be seen by a read because at least 1 of those 2 nodes will have also seen the write.

Any Cassandra node can service a query from the client application because all nodes in Cassandra can assume the role of a query "coordinator". 
Nodes in Cassandra each know about other alive nodes in the cluster. They share cluster information via a protocol called "gossip"

storage model - 
Cassandra leverages a data structure called a Log Structured Merge Tree (LSM tree) index to achieve this speed. The LSM tree is used in place of a B-tree
Cassandra opts for an approach that favors write speed over read speed. Every create / update / delete is a new entry (with some exceptions).
The 3 constructs core to the LSM tree index are:
    Commit Log - This basically is a write-ahead-log to ensure durability of writes for Cassandra nodes.
    Memtable - An in-memory, sorted data structure that stores write data. It is sorted by primary key of each row.
    SSTable - A.k.a. "Sorted String Table." Immutable file on disk containing data that was flushed from a previous Memtable.
With all these constructs working together, writes look like this:
    A write is issued for a node.
    That write is written to the commit log so it doesn't get lost if the node goes down while the write is being processed or if the data is only in the Memtable when the node goes down.
    The write is written to the Memtable.
    Eventually, the Memtable is flushed to disk as an immutable SSTable after some threshold size is hit or some period of time elapses.
    When a Memtable is flushed, any commit log messages are removed that correspond to that Memtable, to save space. 
    These are superfluous now that the Memtable is on disk as an SSTable that is immutable.
When reading data for a particular key, Cassandra reads the Memtable first, which will have the latest data. If the Memtable does not have the data for the key, 
Cassandra leverages a bloom filter to determine which SSTables on disk might have the data. It then reads the SSTables in order from newest to oldest to find the 
latest data for the row. The data in SSTables is sorted by primary key, making it easy to find a particular key.

In the presence of write attempts to nodes that are considered "offline", Cassandra leverages a technique called "hinted handoffs." 
When a node is considered offline by a coordinator node attempting to write to it, the coordinator temporarily stores the write data in order for the write to proceed.
This temporary data is called a "hint." When the offline node is detected as online, the node (or nodes) with a hint sends that data to the previously-offline node.

Dynamo DB - 
DynamoDB tables are defined by a primary key, which can consist of one or two attributes:
    Partition Key - A single attribute that, along with the sort key (if present), uniquely identifies each item in the table. DynamoDB uses the partition key's value to determine 
        the physical location of the item within the database. This value is hashed to determine the partition where the item is stored.
    Sort Key (Optional) - An additional attribute that, when combined with the partition key, forms a composite primary key. The sort key is used to order items with the same 
        partition key value, enabling efficient range queries and sorting within a partition.

A snowflake is composed of 64 bits:
    The highest-order bit is always 0.
    The next 41 bits encode a timestamp, representing milliseconds since the chosen epoch.
    The next 10 bits represent a machine ID, preventing clashes.
    The next 12 more bits represent a per-machine sequence number, to allow creation of multiple snowflakes in the same millisecond.
    Only 63 bits are variable, so that a non-negative number can be processed readily as a 64-bit signed integer; the final number is generally serialized textually as a decimal number
Snowflakes are sortable by time, because they are based on the time they were created

Global Secondary Index (GSI) - An index with a partition key and optional sort key that differs from the table's partition key. GSIs allow you to query items based 
    on attributes other than the table's partition key. 
    Since GSIs use a different partition key, the data is stored on entirely different physical partitions from the base table and is replicated separately.
Local Secondary Index (LSI) - An index with the same partition key as the table's primary key but a different sort key. LSIs enable range queries and sorting within a partition. 
    Since LSIs use the same partition key as the base table, they are stored on the same physical partitions as the items they're indexing.
DynamoDB does support ProjectionExpression to return only specific attributes, this only reduces network bandwidth 


ML engineer interview questions - Exponent
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_E4wnZGJKo

